Hello and welcome to this
course in database engineering. Almost everyone has
used the database. More likely,
information about us is probably present in many
databases all over the world. But who understands
what a database is, and how important
database engineering is to global industry, governments, and organizations? A very straightforward
description of a database is that it is a form of electronic
storage in which data is held. Of course, that explanation
does not even come close to explaining the impact
of database technology. To give an idea of databases
in a real-world context, let's briefly describe
some typical use cases. For example, your bank uses a database to store
data for customers, bank accounts, and transactions. A hospital stores patient data, staff data, laboratory
data, and more. An online store retains
your profile information along with your shopping history and accounting transactions. Many of these services have access to a diverse
range of data. They collect and store other
items such as your location, how long you spend
on their platform, and friends you connected with, alongside many more facts. Such online services and social media platforms
generate enormous amounts of data due to their
large user base and constant user activity. With the Internet
of things or IoT, many extra devices are now
connected to the Internet. These continual streams
of data have led to a revolution in
database technology to accommodate the volume, variety, and complexity of what has become
known as big data. Whatever the source of the data, a database will typically carry out the following actions, all of which a database
engineer must be familiar with. Store the data,
form connections or relationships between
segmented areas of the data, filter the data to
show relevant records, search data to return
matching records, and have functions to allow
the data to be updated, changed, and deleted
as required. Don't worry if you don't fully understand all these terms. For now, you're just receiving a brief introduction
to databases and data. During the course, you'll explore these concepts
in more detail alongside the many
other tasks that form the duties of a
database engineer. You'll learn about the concepts
of data and databases, how data is related
in a database, and different database
structures and their uses, how to perform, create, read, update,
and delete operations, how to use SQL operators
to sort and filter data, what database normalization is, and how to normalize a database. You'll get to build a
fully operational database and you will also
install and set up software called XAMPP on
your computer to help progress your local and
remote database learning. You're not expected to be a
database engineer just now. There are many videos in
your course that will gradually guide you
toward that goal. Watch, pause, rewind, and rewatch the videos until you're confident in your skills. Then consolidate your
knowledge by consulting the course readings and put your skills into practice
during the course exercises. Along the way, you'll
encounter several knowledge quizzes where you can self-check your progress, and you're not alone
in considering a career as a database engineer, which is why you'll also
work with course discussion prompts that enable you to
connect with your classmates. It's a great way to
share knowledge, discuss difficulties,
and make new friends. To be successful in this course, it is helpful to
commit to a regular and disciplined
approach to learning. You need to be serious about
your study and if possible, map the study
schedule with dates and times that you can devote
to attending the course. It's an online
self-paced course, but it does help to think
of your study in terms of regular attendance in
a learning institute. In summary, this course provides you with a complete
introduction to databases, and it's part of a program
of courses that lead you toward a career in
database engineering.